---
sort: 7
type: post
title: Interim Constution
author: Tlon
image: http://urbit.s3.amazonaws.com/16-3-10/blog-7.jpg
preview: The governing rules for the early days of the Urbit network.
layout: urbit,post
navmode: navbar
navdpad: false
navselect: blog
navpath: /
navhome: /
navclass: urbit
---

## Motivation

Our governance roadmap is this simple interim constitution.  

Urbit must eventually write its own constitution.  But to write a
real, durable constitution, a legitimate convention is required.
Some proto-constitution is required to confirm that legitimacy.

Like most new constitutions, this structure is a mix of Roman and
Anglo-American traditions.  It is as simple as possible and not
optimized for scale or durability.

## Urbit and this document

Urbit is a new network created and owned by the Tlon Corporation.
Tlon's goal is to surrender governance of Urbit to its users, as
soon as this community is collectively ready to receive it.  

This constitution (which is not a legal contract, just a
description of our intent) describes our governance process
during this interim period.

## Structure

This governance structure is designed for maximum efficiency in a
young network.  Its most important task is to replace itself when
it is ready to grow.  It must also name itself.

## Validity

This constitution takes effect as soon as the initial public
presale of Urbit address space is complete.

## Assets

The 50 galaxies marked "urbit.org" in the galaxy table belong to
the republic, and will be used only in the interests of the
republic and Urbit as a whole.

Once this republic acquires a legal identity, Tlon will also
grant this entity control over: the `urbit.org` domain; the
Github `urbit` account; and the first galaxy `~zod`.

## Galaxy table

Of the 256 galaxies, 95 are assigned to Tlon Corporation; 50 are
assigned to urbit.org; 40 are assigned to Tlon employees and
their family members; 34 are assigned directly to unrelated
investors in Tlon; and 37 are assigned to random individuals for
random reasons.  Some of these "randos" donated money or
services; others were just in the right place at the right time.

## Governance structures

The interim republic has three branches: an executive consulate,
a passive senate, and an advisory assembly.  

The consulate has full authority, but must consult with the
assembly and keep it informed.  The assembly is a legislative
branch which is learning its trade.  The senate is a reserved
power with no role in governance.

### Consuls

A consulate is a two-person executive.  If the consuls disagree
on a decision, and cannot agree on how to agree, they must flip a
coin.

Consuls serve in pairs for a year.  The first consuls are Galen
Wolfe-Pauly (a Tlon employee) and Raymond Pasco (a Tlon
contractor).  A consul must be a senator; see below.  

### Senate

The senate is the set of all galaxy holders, voting by galaxy.
The senate does not (at present) perform any real function,
except for one: it must ratify Urbit's next constitution.

A role for the senate would be superfluous because, initially,
the will of the senate is the will of Tlon, and the consluls

This is because, in practice, the will of the Senate is the will
of Tlon.

<<<discussion of galaxy table here; need galaxy table!>>>

To avoid growing the network too quickly, galaxies are activated
gradually.  Initially, only one galaxy is active, the root `~zod`
(galaxy 0).

Galactic certificates start with a hardcoded fingerprint in the
Ames source.  If you have a keypair whose public key matches this
hash, you are a senator for all cryptographic purposes.  If the
fingerprint is zero, a real-world identity is shown; if this is
your identity, we'll check in a fingerprint for you at any time.

But `~zod` has the routing power to choose whether its network,
which is the whole network, routes to other galaxies.  So the
consuls, who control `~zod`, have the power to decide whether
and/or when other galaxies can launch usable stars.  There are
many reasons to keep the live network from containing vast
deserts of usable, but unused, address space.

Except for Tlon galaxies, galaxy activation is at random.  Tlon
can activate its galaxies whenever (because it needs to be able
to keep its lights on).

### Assembly

The *assembly* is the *set of all independent stars*.  An
independent star is any star *not* owned by anyone who is also a
senator, or has a family or employment connection with a senator.

In the long run, the mission of the assembly is to govern Urbit
with the consent of the senate.  The vague idea of the
proto-constitution is that the assembly's power should increase
over time; at first, the consulate polls it; later, it gets a
veto; still later, it can propose its own measures; finally, it
elects the consuls.  

Since the consuls must still be senators, there is always a
balance of authority between consulate, assembly and senate.
This whole design is ripped off from ancient Rome, which after
all did pretty well with it.  But again, it's just an idea;
Urbit will write its own constitution.

### The next constitution

Urbit's next constitution will be written by the assembly, under
the moderation of the consuls, for the approval of the senate.
This will happen when the consuls think it's ready to happen.

Ideally, Urbit's constitution will be written in two languages:
English, and a smart-contract language such as Ethereum.  Of
course, Ethereum can't enforce decisions; but it can count the
votes.  And there's no excuse for not using it this way.
