+++
title = "Cryptography"
weight = 50
template = "doc.html"
+++

Cryptography is central to the operation of Urbit. Here we give an overview of
how it is utilized.

There are two categories of keys and five components of the system involved with
cryptography on Urbit. We first summarize the two categories of keys and how
they are utilized by each ship type, then cover how different parts of Urbit are
involved in cryptography.

### Types of keys

The two categories of keys are your Azimuth/Ethereum keys and your networking
keys. In both cases, these are public/private key pairs utilized for public key
cryptography.

#### Azimuth keys

Your Urbit ID exists as an ERC-721 non-fungible token on the Ethereum
blockchain, and as such is contained in a wallet whose private key you possess.
If you are are utilizing a [master
ticket](@/docs/azimuth/azimuth.md#master-ticket), this private key is derived
from a seed, which is what you use to login to
[Bridge](@/docs/glossary/bridge.md). Otherwise, you have generated the key by
some other process, of which there are too many to list here. Besides the
private key which unlocks your ownership wallet address, you may have a few
other private keys which unlock a wallet that corresponds to your ship's
[proxies](@/docs/glossary/proxies.md). We refer collectively to these keys as
your _Azimuth keys_.

Only [planets](@/docs/glossary/planet.md), [stars](@/docs/glossary/star.md), and
[galaxies](@/docs/glossary/galaxy.md) have Azimuth keys.
[Moons](@/docs/glossary/moon.md) and [comets](@/docs/glossary/comet.md) do not,
as they do not utilize the Ethereum blockchain.

It is important to note that no Azimuth keys are stored anywhere within your
ship's [pier](@/docs/glossary/pier.md) - Ethereum and Urbit ID are entirely
separate entities from Urbit itself, and so you lose access to your Azimuth
private keys there is no way to retrieve them somehow from your ship.

For more information on the usage of these keys and the associated proxies, see
the [Azimuth documentation](@/docs/azimuth/azimuth.md).

#### Networking keys

All communications in Urbit over the [Ames](@/docs/glossary/ames.md) networking
are end-to-end encrypted, and thus your ship stores its own public/private pair
of _networking keys_ utilized for encryption and authentication. Networking keys
for all ship types are stored within the ship's Jael vane.

For planets, stars, and galaxies, your private networking key is a
necessary input (the [keyfile](@/docs/glossary/keyfile.md)) for the initial boot
sequence of your ship (sometime called its `%dawn`). The associated public key
is then uploaded to the Ethereum blockchain using one of your Azimuth private
keys - either the one associated to the wallet which owns the ship, or the one
which holds the management proxy.

For moons, the private networking key is generated by the parent ship and
injected into the `%dawn` sequence for the moon, and its public key is stored by
the parent in its Jael vane. Moon networking keys may be changed by the parent
ship, but not by the moon itself.

For comets, their 128-bit `@p` name is actually their public key, and the
"mining" process to generate a comet consists of guessing a private key for
which the associated public key has a galaxy that has already been pre-assigned
to assist its peer discovery process. Thus, comets cannot change their
networking keys - to get a new private networking key, a new comet must be
generated. A comet utilizes its private networking key stored in Jael to sign an
unencrypted attestation packet to verify that it is the owner of the associated
public key. Because of this, it is currently impossible for a ship to initiate
communication with a comet - the comet must always be the initiator. This means
that ultimately two comets cannot communicate with one another unless they have
somehow verified each others' public keys via some other method. This is merely
a technical limitation imposed by the design of the system, not an intentional
handicapping of comet abilities. It is expected that this limitation will
someday be lifted.

### System components

[Ames](@/docs/arvo/ames/ames.md) is Arvo's networking vane. All packets sent by
Ames are encrypted utilizing a cryptosuite found in `zuse`. The only exception
to this are comet self-attestation packets utilized to transmit authentication
of ownership of the private networking key associated to their public key. Ames
is responsible for encryption, decryption, and authentication of all packets. By
default, this utilizes AES symmetric key encryption, whose shared private key is
got by elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman key exchange of the ships' networking keys.

[Jael](@/docs/arvo/jael/jael-api.md) is primarily utilized for the safe storage
of private networking keys and retrieval of public networking keys utilized by
Ames. The Jael vane of planets, stars, and galaxies are responsible for
distributing the public keys of their moons (ultimately via Ames).

`zuse` is the Hoon standard library. It contains cryptographic functions which
are utilized by Ames. All cryptographic primitives are
[jetted](@/docs/vere/jetting.md) in Vere with standard vetted implementations of
cryptographic libraries.

[Vere](@/docs/vere/_index.md) is Urbit's Nock runtime system, written in C.
Correct implementation of cryptographic libraries is difficult, and so all
cryptographic functions implemented in Hoon are hinted to the interpreter to run
vetted cryptographic libraries reviewed by experts instead.

[Azimuth](@/docs/azimuth/_index.md) is Urbit's Ethereum-based public key
infrastructure. `azimuth-tracker` obtains networking public keys for planets,
stars, and galaxies from this store, which are then stored in Jael and utilized
by Ames for end-to-end encrypted communication.





